In the two previous lectures, we discussed
algorithms that solve the single-source
shortest path problem, but what if we wanted the
shortest path from each vertex to each vertex.
In other words, the shortest path from u to v
for each pair of vertices (u, v) in the graph.
Such a problem is called: The
all-pairs shortest path problem.
How to solve this problem? Knowing that
we want to still get the optimal result
when there are negative edges, unless
there is a negative cycle obviously.
Currently, we know how to get the shortest path
from a single vertex to any vertex v, by using
the Bellman-Ford algorithm. So we may think,
why don't we just call Bellman-Ford starting
from each vertex and we get what we're searching
for? This solution works, yes, it's a valid one.
For the time complexity, Bellman-Ford is in
O(|V||E|) time, and we're calling it |V| times,
once on each vertex, so we multiply, we
get a time complexity of O(|V|²+|V||E|).
However, it's not the most optimized
solution, we have more efficient algorithms,
like the one we will see in this
lecture: The Floyd-Warshall algorithm.
Okay, imagine that going directly from your house
to your school is 50 meters. Then you notice
that going from your house to the supermarket
then from the supermarket to your school has a
total of distance of 35. Here you found a shorter
path by using intermediate vertices. In general,
to go from a vertex u to a vertex v, passing by an
intermediate vertex z can give a shorter path than
directly taking the edge from u to v. And it's the
idea Floyd-Warshall algorithm uses, to calculate
the shortest path from u to v, we start by
considering the edge (u, v) as the shortest path,
then we keep discovering shorter and shorter
paths by setting other vertices as intermediates.
The Floyd-Warshall algorithm is based on two
things: This principle of intermediate vertices,
and dynamic programming. In Bellman-Ford, we found
a recurrence relation, we implemented it with a
recursive function, that we later optimized
with dynamic programming. In Floyd-Warshall,
same thing, we will discover a recurrence relation
that calculates the shortest path from u to v,
we implement it with a recursive function,
then we optimize it with dynamic programming.
Let's start. Imagine that we have this graph.
Let's first define some notation. We have the
array of vertices of the graph, each one of them
has an index. A is 0, B is 1...etcetera. We define
dij as the shortest distance from the vertex
whose index is i to the vertex whose index is j.
For example the shortest distance from A to B
would be denoted d01, because A's index is 0 and
B's index is 1. Also, we have an extra variable
k in superscript, it's an indicator that tells us
that we're allowed to use the vertices {0, 1, 2,
..., k} as intermediates. For example if k = 3,
then we can use vertices ABCD as intermediates.
You will better understand with an example.
Let's say we want to calculate the shortest
distance from A to B, we want to calculate d01.
At the beginning, we don't allow any
vertex to be an intermediate vertex,
we want the value of d01^(-1). When we cannot
use an intermediate vertex, we have no choice
except taking the direct edge from i to j, if it
exists obviously. Here it exists, and it has a
weight of 18, so by not using an intermediate
vertex, we get a shortest path of length 18.
Now k becomes 0, so we allow the first
vertex, A, to be an intermediate vertex.
Now we have two choices: Either keeping our
current shortest path, A to B, or set A as an
intermediate, we first go from A to A, then from A
to B. Obviously, we will choose the shortest one.
Well, going from a vertex to itself
has always a shortest length of 0,
so it doesn't decrease our shortest distance as
you can see, we can just keep the current one.
Now let's set k to 1, we can use the first
two vertices, A and B, as intermediates.
If we put B, we get a new path to try, from A to
B then from B to B. Same thing here, we have a
vertex going to itself, 0, we get the same result.
In general, if we're searching for the shortest
distance from i to j, putting one of them as
the intermediate vertex is useless. This is why,
we can say that dik^(k) is equal to dik^(k-1), in
other words, when searching for the shortest path
with k as the destination, it's useless to put
k as an intermediate vertex, it will give the
same result as when we had one less allowed
vertex, dik^(k-1), this is why they're equal.
Same thing for when k is the source, it's
useless to put it as an intermediate,
this is why dkj^(k) is equal to dkj^(k-1).
You really need to understand these.
Let's continue. k = 2, we
put C as the intermediate,
now things start getting interesting. So we have
two choices, either keeping the current best path,
or taking the shortest path from A to C,
then taking the shortest path from C to B.
The shortest path from A to C is to
directly take the edge (A, C), we get
-4. And from C to B, directly
take the edge (C, B), we get 16.
The sum is 12, so we found a shorter path than
the one we had, by using C as an intermediate.
Let's move to k = 3, we put D as an intermediate.
The shortest path from A to D is A-C-D, length is
10. And from D to B is the path D-B, 6. The sum
is 16, our current path is better, we keep it.
Now you may tell me, you're wrong, the shortest
path from A to D is actually A-C-E-D, which has a
total weight of -1, which would give us a path
from A to B of 5, better than the actual one.
Yes, but, remember that k is 3, we can only use
the vertices  as intermediates, ABCD,
not E. But what if, because of this restriction,
we miss a shorter path? Don't worry, it doesn't
happen, because the shorter path that includes
E, A-C-E-D, will appear in the next iteration,
when E will be the intermediate. What are we doing
in this iteration? We are searching for the value
of d01^(3), the shortest distance from A to B
that we get by allowing the vertices {0, 1, 2,
3} to be intermediate vertices. To calculate its
value, we're comparing the length of two paths:
The first one is the current shortest path, the
one we already had even without allowing the
new vertex, the one of the previous iteration,
its weight is d01^(2). And the second path is
the one we get by putting the newly allowed
vertex, the vertex k, D, as intermediate.
Its weight is the sum of the shortest path
from A to D, + the shortest path from D to B.
But, as said earlier, these two shortest paths
are the one we get by allowing the vertices {0,
1, 2, ..., k} only, this is why we didn't
take the path that contains E for example,
even if it was shorter. This is why we
express the restriction with superscript,
the shortest distance from A to D by
allowing vertices  is d03^(3).
And the shortest distance from D to B by
allowing vertices  is d31^(3).
We have these two distances, and because
we're searching for the shortest one,
we take the minimum. Okay let's continue,
let's move to k = 4, now we allow E.
We want to have the value of d01^(4), so we
will compare the current shortest distance,
d01^(3), and the one we get by putting
E as an intermediate, d04^(4) + d41^(4).
The shortest distance from A to E is
-6, that we get with the path A-C-E.
And the shortest distance from E to B
is 11, that we get with the path E-D-B.
The sum is 5, smaller than 12, we found a shorter
path to go from A to B, it's A-C-E-D-B. And as
you can see, we have A-C-E-D, we didn't lose it, I
told you that we fill find in the next iteration,
this is why when we set k as an intermediate,
we work with vertices  only,
we don't worry about ones higher than k
because we will find them in next iterations.
Here is what we calculated at each value of
k. When k is -1, we were not allowed to have
intermediate vertices at all, so we directly
took the value of the direct edge from A to B,
whose weight is represented by w01.
And for greater values, to get d01^(k),
we were always comparing between two values: The
shortest distance with the previous value of k,
d01^(k-1), and the shortest distance
by putting k as an intermediate vertex.
To get the second one, we do the sum of the
shortest distance from 0 to k by using vertices
0 to k, d0k^(k), + the shortest distance from
k to 1 by using vertices from 0 to k, dk1^(k).
In brief, the value of d01^(k) is w01 if
k = -1, else it's min between d01^(k-1),
and d0k^(k) + dk1^(k). Here we were calculating
the shortest distance from 0 to 1, from A to B,
this is why we wrote d01, but this formula is
valid for any pair (i, j). So dij^(k) is equal
to wij if k = -1, and min between dij^(k-1) and
dik^(k) + dkj^(k) otherwise. wij is 0 if i is
equal to j, else the weight of the edge from
i to j if it exists, and infinity otherwise.
And earlier we said that dik^(k) is equal to
dik^(k-1), and dkj^(k) is equal to dkj^(k-1),
we replace, and we get this
nice recurrence relation.
In some other resources you will find k=0 instead
of -1, it's because it depends on if we use
0-indexing or 1-indexing. If we use 0-indexing,
as we did here, the base case is k = -1. And if
it's 1-indexing, as it's the case in a lot
of resources, the base case is when k = 0.
Let's add a quick example, we want to calculate
the shortest distance from A to D, d03. d03^(-1)
is w03, which is infinity because we don't have a
direct edge from A to D. d03^(0) is min(d03^(-1),
d00^(-1)+d03^(-1)), we still get infinity. d03^(1)
is min(d03^(0), d01^(0)+d13^(0)), we get infinity.
d03^(2) is min(d03^(1), d02^(1)+d23^(1)), we get
10. d03^(3) is min(d03^(2), d03^(2)+d33^(2)), we
get 10. d03^(4) is min(d03^(3), d04^(3)+d43^(3)),
we get -1, we found a shorter path.
We cannot go beyond k=4, so the
shortest distance from A to D is -1.
Let's convert this recurrence relation to code.
We need the adjacency matrix, to easily know the
value of wij. We also need i j and k. If k == -1,
we return adj_mat[i][j], which represents wij.
Else, we return min between d(i, j, k-1)
and d(i, k, k-1)+d(k, j, k-1). That's it.
Okay but how to solve our initial problem,
the all pairs shortest path problem.
We have an adjacency list graph. We start
by creating a mapping between each vertex
and its index, as we did in the example, A
was 0, B was 1...etcetera, it's important to
work with the adjacency matrix and later the dp
table. For that we compute the list of vertices,
and for each index i, we assign i to the vertex
at index i. Then we convert the adjacency list
to an adjacency matrix by creating an n by
n matrix with infinity as a default value.
Then for each edge (u, v, w), we put
w in the cell mat[idx[u]][idx[v]].
We also put zeros for cells from a vertex
to itself, because even if we may not have
an edge from u to itself, the shortest distance
from u to itself is 0, by not taking any edge.
Now adj_mat[i][j] represents wij.
You need to know that as a result, we want a table
dist of size n by n where dist[i][j] represents
the shortest distance from the vertex whose index
is i to the vertex whose index is j. We create it,
then to fill it, we use our recursive
function. For each cell (i, j), we want dij.
We want dij by allowing all vertices, so the
initial value of k is n-1, the index of the
last vertex. This is why we assign d(i, j, n-1)
to dist[i][j]. We got our dist table, we return
it along with idx map to be able to recognize
what vertex each row and column represent.
Now we can know the shortest distance
from any vertex to any vertex,
for example if we want the shortest
distance from C to B, index of C is 2,
index of B is 1, so we read dist[2][1], which
is 9, the shortest distance from C to B is 9.
Before we move further, you may ask yourself why
do we need k in the first place? Why do we allow
0 then 1 then 2 vertices and so on? Why don't we
just directly calculate by allowing all vertices?
Well, imagine that you want to directly get the
global shortest distance from A to B. It can be by
going directly from A to B, going from A to C then
from C to B, going from A to D then from D to B,
and so on. Imagine that you want to evaluate this
possibility, going from A to C then from C to B.
For that, you need the shortest distance from
A to C, and the shortest distance from C to B.
And the shortest distance from A to C
can be: Taking the edge from A to C,
going from A to B then from B to C, and so on. As
you can see, we have mutually dependent values,
to calculate dAB we need dAC, and to calculate dAC
we need dAB. This is why we cannot do it directly,
we need to build shortest paths incrementally,
first with k = -1, then 0, then 1, and so on.
Okay the solution we made now works, however,
if we draw the recursion tree of calling d(0, 1,
4) for example, we can see a lot of repeated
recursive calls, same as in Bellman-Ford.
What to do then? Dynamic programming.
To avoid repeated work, we use dynamic
programming, its bottom-up approach to be
specific, the one where we build a table.
Here we have 3 changing parameters: i,
j, and k, so we will have a 3D table.
i has n possible values, because it represents
a vertex and we have n vertices. j, same thing,
n possible values. And for k, it has n+1
possible values: -1, 0, 1, until the last
vertex, whose assigned index is n-1. So we
will have a 3D table of shape (n+1, n, n).
Why did I put k in the first dimension?
It's because to calculate dij for a value k,
we need distances dij for the value
k-1, ones with the previous value of k.
This is why we put k as the first dimension, to
have all values dij^(-1) in the first iteration,
then we use them to calculate all
values dij^(0) in the second iteration,
then we use them to calculate all values
dij^(1) in the third iteration, and so on.
We will see an example don't worry, let's just
finish making our solution. A 3D table is hard to
visualize, especially if we want to see all the
values, so instead, we will show the 2D tables
that are inside individually, because as you may
know, a 3D array is just an array of 2D arrays.
For this example, here is the table with k
= -1, then the one with k = 0, and so on.
The table with k = -1 is in reality
just the updated adjacency matrix,
so we can create a table of size n instead of n+1
and use adj_mat when we need values of dij^(-1).
We made the table, now we need to fill it.
From the recurrence relation, when k = -1, dij^(k)
is just wij, that we can get from the updated
adjacency matrix. Then for remaining values of k,
for each one of them, we traverse couples of cells
(i, j) of dp[k]. dp[k][i][j] represents dij^(k),
and from the relation we know that dij^(k) is
equal to min(dij^(k-1), dik^(k-1)+dkj^(k-1)).
So dp[k][i][j] is equal to min(dp[k-1][i][j],
dp[k-1][i][k]+dp[k-1][k][j]), as simple
as that. Exception made when k is 0,
because there is no previous row k-1, we use the
adjacency matrix, which contains values dij^(-1).
We filled the table, we return its last element,
which is the table that contains values dij^(n-1),
along with idx map, and we optimized
the solution with dynamic programming.
We still have some things to modify however.
Same as with Bellman-Ford, we can get rid of 1
dimension, the first one, the result will stay the
same. This is why instead of using a 3D table, we
will just use a single table of shape (n, n) that
we will keep updating. The meaning of dp[i][j]
slightly changes but we still get the same result.
dp starts with values of adj_mat because they
represent values when k = -1, then we get values
of the next value of k at each iteration. Also,
here the adjacency matrix can be removed, instead
of creating and filling the updated adjacency
matrix then copying it to dp, we can just directly
fill dp. So we create dp, a table of size n by n,
and we initially fill it with values wij. For each
edge (u, v, w), we assign w to dp[idx[u][idx[v]].
And we assign 0 for values of the diagonal,
because distance from u to u is 0.
Now with remaining values of k, we just
update values of dp[i][j] with the formula.
We can rename dp to dist by the way, dist means
distance. And we can also turn this min function
into a condition, if dp[i][k]+dp[k][j] is smaller
than dp[i][j], dp[i][j] becomes dp[i][k]+dp[k][j].
Last thing, with things being like that, we
just have the distance, not the path itself,
let's fix that. For that, we need
to introduce path reconstruction.
In Dijkstra's algorithm and Bellman-Ford
algorithm, we were using prev table,
a 1D table where prev[v] represents the
vertex just before v in the shortest path
from source to v. In Floyd-Warshall, we will
use the opposite, we will use a table next,
it's a 2D table where nxt[i][j] represents the
vertex just after ith vertex in the shortest path
from ith vertex to jth vertex, it's more adapted
for the way Floyd-Warshall algorithm works.
We have a shortest path for each couple (i,
j), so we need a 2D table of size n by n.
How to fill the next table? Initially, the
shortest path from i to j is the one where
we directly take the edge (i, j), if it exists,
this is why dist[i][j] is initialized to wij.
Which means that in the shortest path, j comes
just after i, it's the second vertex of the path,
we put j in next[i][j]. If the edge
exists obviously, otherwise we put null,
because we didn't find any path from i to j yet.
We also know that to go from a vertex to itself,
we initially assume that the shortest path is by
just staying on the vertex, to get a weight 0.
So we put i in next[i][i], the next vertex of the
shortest path from a vertex to itself is itself.
We can say that initially, next[i][j] is i if
i is equal to j, because we're going from a
vertex to itself, and to j if there is an edge
from ith vertex to jth vertex, because without
intermediate vertices, the only possible path
from Vi to Vj is taking the edge from Vi to Vj.
And null otherwise, we don't
have a path from Vi to Vj yet.
For example you can see that in the diagonal, we
have 0 1 2 3 4, because next[i][i] is equal to i.
And for example we have an edge from A, whose
index is 0, to C, whose index is 2, this is
why next[0][2] is 2. And during iterations, when
dist[i][k]+dist[k][j] is smaller than dist[i][j],
it means that we found a shorter path
by putting k as an intermediate vertex,
this is why we update dist[i][j]. We also need to
update next[i][j], because the path might change.
Putting k as an intermediate means that
we first go from i to k, then from k to j,
in other words, we first take the shortest path
from i to k then the shortest path from k to j.
And how to get the next vertex after i to go
to k? It's stored in next[i][k], this is why
we assign it to next[i][j], because now to go from
i to j, we first need to go to k, and to go to k,
the next vertex is next[i][k]. In code, after
dist we create another n by n matrix next,
where cells have initially the value null. Now
for each edge (u, v), we put the index of v in
next[idx[u]][idx[v]], because v should come
just after u in the initial shortest path,
and in tables we work with indices,
not vertices themselves, because
arrays accept indices only as a key. And when
traversing the diagonal to put 0 in dist[i][i],
we also put i in next[i][i], as explained
earlier. And when updating dist[i][j],
we also put next[i][k] in next[i][j], we just
explained why. And we got our next table, we
return it with dist and idx to be able to actually
find the shortest path not just its weight.
Okay but how to reconstruct the path? Easy,
we have source vertex, destination vertex,
next table, and we keep jumping to the next
vertex by using the table, the opposite of what
we were doing in Dijkstra's and Bellman-Ford.
But our matrix stores indices of vertices,
not their labels, this is why we need the idx map
to get the index of a vertex, and we also need to
create the opposite thing, label map, a map that
maps the index of a vertex to its label. After it,
we create a path array where we put the source
vertex. We also need a variable temp to keep track
of the index of the current vertex, it starts
at the index of source because we start from it.
Now while we didn't get to the index of
the destination, we keep moving to the
next vertex and adding to the path. This is
why we assign nxt[temp][idx[dest]] to temp,
it represents the next vertex in the shortest
path from current vertex to destination.
And we assign the label of the current vertex
to the path. After the loop, we return path.
Once again, we need to make
sure that a path exists,
this is why if nxt[idx[src]][idx[dest]] is null,
then there is no path, we return an empty array.
Second problem, detecting negative cycles. By
definition, a negative cycle starts and ends at
the same vertex because it's a cycle, and has
a negative total weight because it's negative.
The shortest path from a vertex to itself is
0, this is why there are zeros in the diagonal.
Except when there is a negative cycle,
because it goes from a vertex to itself,
with a weight that is smaller than
0, 0 will be replaced by that value.
So to detect existence of a negative cycle, we
just traverse the main diagonal of dist table
after filling it, and if one of the values is
smaller than 0, then there is a negative cycle,
we can for example return null as
we did with the previous algorithm.
And we finished our implementation,
this is the Floyd-Warshall algorithm.
For the time complexity, we get an O(|V|^3)
time complexity because of the nested loops.
You can see that the time complexity
isn't affected by the number of edges,
which makes this algorithm a good
choice when having a dense graph.
We needed around 30 minutes for this algorithm,
with a lot of calculations, recurrence relation,
recursion tree, dynamic programming, reducing the
table dimensions from 3D to 2D, reconstructing the
path...etcetera. I know that you may have
felt lost in all of this, and it's fine,
you can still watch it again now that you have the
full idea of the algorithm, or ask me questions.
Because I think that starting from the basic
idea and building the intuition is better than
directly showing the code with 3 loops and that's
it, as it's the case in a lot of online tutorials.
In brief, it's better to know about the
underlying details of an algorithm than
just reading the global idea without knowing
why and from where it comes from. Sure you
can be confused at the beginning, but a
thought-provoking explanation that will
let you ask questions and make researches
to better understand, is more interesting,
in my opinion, than just reciting the steps of the
algorithm, show a small example and basta. And you
can apply what I just said to any algorithm
we studied and will study in this course.
Last thing we will talk about in this lecture
is the transitive closure of a graph. Let's say
we have a graph G. We know about the adjacency
matrix, an n by n matrix where mat[i][j] is 1
if there is an edge from i to j, 0 otherwise. For
unweighted graphs at least. The transitive closure
of a graph, is slightly different, it's an n by n
matrix where mat[i][j] is 1 if there exists a path
from i to j, 0 otherwise, this is why it's also
called "reachability matrix". For example here
mat[A][D] is 0 in the adjacency matrix, because
there is no direct edge from A to D, but 1 in the
transitive closure because we can go from A to D,
at least indirectly, by taking the path A->C->D.
Okay but what does it have to do with this
lecture? The relationship is that Floyd-Warshall
algorithm is one of the ways we can use to compute
it. In the matrix returned by Floyd-Warshall,
dist[i][j], represents the shortest distance to
go from i to j. If the cell's value is infinity,
then we couldn't find any path, else if it's
a number, then we found at least one path.
So what we can do to find the transitive closure
is to turn cells that contain a number into 1,
because there is at least one path, and turn cells
that contain infinity into 0, there is no path
from i to j, and we get the transitive closure.
Or we can directly get the result we want with
a single pass, by replacing the expression we
assign to dist[i][j] by this bitwise operation.
We've reached the end of this dense lecture, I
hope that you understood the presented material,
and see you in the next lecture to discover
a new algorithm: Johnson's algorithm.